Actually, I've jumped ahead to 1965 and taken them the third revised and enlarged manuscript, and that's when Princeton gave me the contract.
So you did two full manuscripts, actually a third manuscript before you actually even had a contract.
The third manuscript, right.
And that was a large one.
Now, were they telling you after the first two that they'd probably do it, that they would do it?
What kept you coming back?
Let's say after the second one, they indicated an interest.
And that was enough for me to get entree to a few places where the very fact that they had indicated that interest to get material I might not have been able to get.
But they wanted this perfectly typed manuscript to photo offset.
And, oh, I've always been so glad that I refused to let it, you know.
So who was your editor at Princeton?
Polly Hanford.
Is Polly still there?
Oh, I doubt it very much because she was, now see, that's 65, over 30 years ago.
Her husband was a classicist, and she had absolutely no interest in Hemingway.
She went through the whole manuscript and took out the commas, the serial commas, and then they decided they wanted them back.
So then she went through it and put some of them back, and there were, oh...
over a hundred that I had to put into the proof.
So she had no interest in this.
She was assigned to this task, then I gather.
She was assigned to it, yes.
And of course, a very sweet woman and, you know, just ever so nice.
How is it, do you think, that Princeton decided to publish this?
Oh, well, simply because on Carlos Baker's recommendation.
So really, Carlos Baker played an essential... He did.
He did indeed.
I only... And then when I went down to... Flew down to Austin, to the University of Texas, and the director of the press there... This was before I'd signed the contract, of course.
There, they wanted to publish it.
But they talked...
an addition of 500 copies, and I could have as many as I wanted, where Princeton had mentioned 2,500 copies for the first printing, and I could have 10.
So that, naturally, I wanted it to have a wide... As wide a distribution as possible.
Distribution...
I even asked Vincent, the editor there, Marian Brookhoff, the director, later she was the director, if they had ever considered doing the paperback.
And, no, no, that wouldn't have... So how many copies did they print of the bibliography?
Let's see, I have the bibliography right in front of me, and...
Let's see, the first printing was 2,500, and then they did a second printing in 1969.
Excuse me.
2,380 in 1969.
Okay, and the first printing was what year?
The first printing was 1967.
Okay, so that sold out pretty good.
So that, and then by 1969, then they did a second, and then the supplement in 1975, they printed 2,532 of it.
2,00532.
Mm-hmm, of the supplement.
But then it went out of print before the, it went out of print in 1989, and then the bibliography went out of print in 1995.
1985, the supplement went out of print before?
1989.
And then the actual bibliography?
Went out of print in 1995.
And how many sold?
Did they ever have anything beyond the second printing?
Not of the supplement.
So actually, it was in print, though, from 1969 to 1967 to 1995?
Uh-huh.
Wow.
That's amazing.
But it took them 30 years to sell those 2,300 books?
No.
Oh, oh.
From 1969 to 1995, it took them 27 years, or whatever that is, to sell 2,380 books.
Right.
It had a good, and of course, then I'd get, you know, one half of, I mean, well, that's another story.
Well, but I am interested in this because clearly you didn't do this for any kind of money that you might have made.
Oh, no, no.
I mean, I can't imagine that you made more than $15,000 or $20,000 on this if you made that much.
You know, I've never tallied it.
But Mary Hemingway was concerned that I thought I would make money from it.
You know, that I'd be... Profiting on her husband.
But I had never planned, I never expected to.
You know, people told me that scholarly writing, you know, you didn't do it for monetary incentives.
But I told Mary that the royalties would surely, this would be in like 1966 or something, 65.
And I remember telling her that the royalties would surely be enough for me to go to Paris and see all the places mentioned in, you know, in his books, and the sun also rises in a movable feast.
And they were, and I did, and I went over by myself in 1969.
So that, and of course walked the,
The left bank.
So what kinds of places did you see?
Oh, I saw all of them.
You know, where Gertrude Stein had lived, where the, what is it, Luxembourg Gardens, where the, you know, the Hemingway addresses and that, where I had known he lived.
And I had to have Café au lait at the, what is it, the...
D-E-U-X-M-A-G-O-T-S, and just that kind of, you know.
And were you mindful that, well, this is my reward?
I was indeed, yes.
Yes, I was very, very pleased to finally see it all.
Well, whose idea was it to do the supplement?
Oh, Princeton came up with, uh, uh, Marion Brokaw at Princeton wrote me, um, oh, like 1970, and, um, and asked for, uh, you know, if I could update it.
Now, they didn't expect what they got.
They thought it was just going to be a thin little, a thin little book that would, uh,
you know, encouraged sales for the first book.
But it didn't end out that way.
It ended out, you know, to be a fairly sizable, as you know, a fairly sizable book.
But at that same time, you know, that's something else about... I had contributed a 24-page Hemingway addenda to...
to Matt Bruckley and Frasier Clark's 1970 Fitzgerald Hemingway Annual.
And then they wanted me to continue doing that.
But then when Princeton requested a supplement, and I had this very demanding job at McGraw Hill working under constant deadlines, they were very disappointed when I didn't continue.
I met
Charlie Mann.
No.
Special collections librarian at Penn State.
I don't know him, no.
He introduced me to Matt Bruckley at an annual meeting of the Bibliographical Society.
They used to hold him at the Morgan Library, and they still do.
And Bruckley's first question was, what university did you attend?
Oh, dear, my book's going.
So wait, what did you...
And what did you say?
And when I said I hadn't gone to college, he steps back and says real loudly, you're self-educated.
I felt like I was some kind of rare species.
Tell me what a bibliographer has to do to really succeed in bibliography.
I'll tell you.
Just a moment.
Hold on just a moment.
What a bibliographer has to do is she has to have access to collectors.
And everyone told me that without Marky Cohen's collaboration that no one could do a Hemingway bibliography.
And I'd already bought her husband Louis Henry Cohen's 1931 bibliography of his work.
But I went, this is quite a kind of a detailed story, do you mind?
No, please, go ahead.
So, I don't even, I doubt that she's still living, I don't know.
No, Margie Cohn has been dead for some time.
I would imagine.
She got actually hit by a bus in England.
Oh, for God's sake.
Yeah, this was about eight or nine years ago.
Oh, for goodness.
Yeah, she was in England, and she was looking the wrong way, you know.
Oh, my.
Yeah.
That happened to McGraw-Hill authors?
In fact, it's in my book someplace.
Is it in?
Yeah, it's either in the index.
I think Margie Cohn is listed in the index, and I think I tell that.
I do.
In fact, I give a citation for her obituary and everything in there.
So she should be in the index.
Now how could I miss that?
It's there.
But anyway, I will... So how did you get to meet Margie Cohn?
So anyway, I'm told that no one can do it without her cooperation.
So when I told her what I was working on, her response was, not another.
She asked me if I had any idea how many people took up her time with that idea.
Of doing a Hemingway bibliography.
She said everyone expected access to her husband's books and papers.
To her, to Margie Cohn's husband's books.
To Louis Henry Cohn's.
Right.
Yeah.
Because he had a pretty extensive Hemingway collection.
Oh my, he had a beautiful collection.
Mm-hmm.
And then when I told her, you know, what I'd done so far, she said that, you know, I should have examined the first editions first and left all that until later.
Well, what I've already told you, working here in Kansas City, I wasn't, you know.
And so then... So in other words, you did the later editions first, is that right?
I did.
So you worked backwards.
And I guess it would be called that, but I did it in...
I mean, see, you know, I... Well, I did it because of what I was doing, the biography, you know, leading to the bibliography, so that I didn't do the... You know, didn't examine the books until later.
Now, what, did you collate one edition against the other?
Oh, yes, often.
And how did you determine what the points were?
Well, now, of course, see, then for the...
through Farewell to Arms, of course, I had the benefit of his books.
And then Berg Library, Berg Collection, excuse me, the Berg Collection had those early first editions, and I could then
you know, compare what he had, you know, checked all those against what he had, and then from then on, you know, move on from then.
Now, wait a minute, now you're saying collate.
Now, you're saying page by page collation?
Yeah, you didn't do that kind of stuff.
No, I didn't.
No, I didn't mean to infer that.
Imagine how a computer would have helped you.
Wouldn't that?
Absolutely.
Today you can just do a computer search for things and you can find things and it's amazing.
So Margie realized I wasn't a potential customer and she said she had no reason to help me to make anything available to me.
So I should have been discouraged but
I wasn't.
She'd lift item after item out of her file cabinet.
I was just sitting there, frankly salivating.
I wanted to see them so bad, and she just, you know, lifted them out.
Have you seen this?
And, of course, hadn't seen any of them.
Now, what are these kinds of things that she's pulling out?
Oh, like, is it Der Spiegel?
article, the issue, you know, when he committed suicide, and the contract with Boney and Livride, and what's some of the others, something by Gustav Regler that was prefaced, but just, and so I went around the corner to, I went around to a
coffee shop and oh I filled notes pages and notes with with the things that she had mentioned, but you know but hadn't let me let me see, so about a it was almost a year later exactly a year late, and I wrote her that I had made several recent research trips and when I was down at the University of Virginia, C. Waller Barrett had asked if I had examined her husband's collection
And David Randall asked me the same question when I was at the Lilly Library at Indiana University.
So then she wrote me that I could come into her apartment one evening, and this time then she pulled the books from the shelves and let me examine them, and a large scrapbook which Captain Cohen had assembled and yielded a number of great articles.
Hmm.
And I stayed until about midnight, and the evening ended with a pleasant chat about her friendship with P.S.
Eliot and his wife Valerie.
And she showed me some of the, she collected books where she and Louis were mentioned.
So then, and then it wasn't, can I tell you something off the record?
Sure.
It wasn't until my second visit, and she revealed that she had consented to help me, because if she refused, quote, they would call her a bitch.
So that it was just a case of, you know, some of her collectors, important customers, I should say.
Saying to help you.
They were willing to help me and thought she should.
She even went so far as to try to get someone out, a professor, she never told me his name, to...
He had just finished a bibliography, she said, and to get him to do the Hemingway, a Hemingway bibliography, and he refused unless I abandoned mine.
Isn't that something?
So somebody else quit because you were doing yours.
It was very decent of him.
But see, at this point, Mary Hemingway, Scribner's, and Carlos Baker were all...
To an extent, well, yes, they were all helping me so that they were engaged.
Did you exchange a lot of letters with them, with Baker and Mary Hemingway?
Mary Hemingway I visited at the apartment, and she told me immediately that she couldn't help me because she didn't know anything about bibliography.
But, of course, she did help me because she let me see the books that they had brought up from their home in Cuba.
And some of those were edited editions.
You also attempted to do all the foreign editions, too, right?
I did.
And, of course, the anthologies.
All the 40 or so libraries, I would always check their...
for the anthologies, and then at the Library of Congress, I had great... At what point did you feel that you had it pretty well put together?
Oh, I didn't really ever, but Carlos Baker told me that I should simply decide on, like, it ended up being 1966, I think, and stop.
And that's it.
William White gave me the good advice of whatever format I chose to be consistent, and Carlos Baker gave me the advice that at some point I should stop.
So are you still looking for things even though you stopped 30 years ago?
Oh, no, no.
It's only when I get the book catalogs that I receive that I... And you find things that should be in there, right?
Right.
What kinds of things do you find?
Can you think of the kinds of things that you find?
Oh, I just keep, you know, put them in folders.
you know, the new books that come along, when letters come up, when anything comes up at auction.
And I went to, one of the things I was going to tell you about, because you mentioned George Lowry, I believe you do a new book, went to, attended a great series on rare books that he moderated at the New School back in 1977.
And it was...
delightful.
I always continued going there.
I went there to hear Anthony Burgess, and afterwards I introduced myself.
He had, I kept seeing an announcement that he, this is when I was working on a supplement, and I kept seeing an announcement that a book was coming out about Hemingway, so he expressed admiration for the bibliography, which pleased me enormously, and
Let's see.
Well, anyway, I did continue evening, you know.
You know what I suggest?
Why don't we take a little break right now, and I'll call you back.
I think it's an excellent idea.
We had a lovely, lovely California trip, but in Monterey I did get a bit of a head cold, and you can hear I'm kind of sick.
Would you do that?
Sure.
When would be good for you?
Oh, now, are you saying half an hour?
How about another hour?
Is that okay with you?
Be fine.
I told my daughter I'd help her with something and she just came home from school.
And I need about an hour with her.
Oh, do take it.
So how about if I call you back at about 4.30?
Let's see, are you saying your time?
Yes, that would be 3.30 your time.
Oh, that would be fine.
Okay, so it's about 2.20 out there right now, right?
Very good.
So why don't you just take a little break, and I don't think we have that much more to go.
I think maybe another half an hour or so.
I've got some more here about Mary.
Good.
Well, let's pick up with Mary when I call back.
Okay.
Okay?
Very good.
Okay, good.
I'll see you in a little while.
Right.
Bye-bye.
We're going again.
And I have your bibliography right here, believers.
Now, can I tell you a couple more things about Margie?
Please, yes.
And then I've got some notes here on Mary.
Okay.
But when you were saying about what a bibliographer needed, and I said to be in touch with Hemingway collectors, and of course Margie Cohen put me in touch with several, and most notably Jonathan Goodwin.
His collection was auctioned, well, I guess it's been some years now.
I gave Tom the catalog.
But I took an early train up to Hartford, and he had brought in some important items into his office, and I worked under pressure.
I worked without a lunch break until the office closed.
But it was just great because he had a lot of the
Oak Park High School newspapers that I hadn't seen before, but he didn't want to be acknowledged.
He said he was already receiving too many book catalogs, but he wrote me a lovely letter after the book came out.
But in July of 1966, now the manuscript's almost ready to go to Princeton, and Mark Cohn wrote me,
that several people had asked her if I was going to start where her husband's bibliography left off, you know, after A Farewell to Arms.
I mean, I was just amazed.
So anyway, I reminded her we had discussed it one evening in her apartment, and I was under the impression she had agreed.
I mean, the usefulness of my bibliography required that I start at the beginning of Hemingway's work.
Can you imagine?
That's amazing, yeah.
Isn't that amazing?
Yeah.
That she would, what's it, yes, that, Nicholas, in late December, 1967, I went up to House of Books, and I had the extreme thrill.
She had, oh, three or four stacks of my bibliography there, over 30 copies, you know, from individuals.
She did.
For me to inscribe.
How do you like that for a turnaround, huh?
Oh, yes, yes.
Just so gratifying.
And, of course, so worthy, you know, the letters I received.
One of the books that I inscribed that day went to Donald St.
John.
He and his wife, Ruth, owned the carryback books in Franconia, New Hampshire.
And they were in Italy at the time, and he had Margie send...
He had her hold the other book, but he had her send mine over.
And I hope to have a pleasure someday of showing you the letter he sent from there.
It is just priceless.
That's great.
It really is.
Now, I have a question.
Now, these various categories, the A, B, C, D, are these your designations, or do these follow any kind of a... Like, you go all the way up to H, newspaper, periodical, material on Hemingway.
Were these categories that you designated or are these more or less standardized?
Princeton, when I went to the press, and they had published Ford, Harvey's rather, Ford, Maddox, Ford.
So they gave me a copy of that to use as a guide.
And then I studied a number of other bibliographies.
And I simply adapted those categories that I needed to fit what I was doing on Hemingway.
You know, like some of them didn't have anthologies.
Some didn't have foreign translations.
Some didn't have holdings of letters.
And then I did that survey of 55 libraries for their holding, and I think I must have gotten 95, 98% response.
And I just had to...
to kind of find, you know, to find the format that, and of course, like everything, each book would require its own format so that... Excuse me, Ms.
Audrey, just a second.
My daughter's got a problem here.
Just one, will you forgive me just a second?
Go ahead.
Okay.
I told them the whole story.
I'll see you in a bit.
But everything's okay now.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
My daughter hears that.
No, no.
Just all night.
She's 14 and they're having their tests now.
Oh, of course.
End of the term.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Okay.
But I do owe you a thanks because yesterday I reread Donald St.
John's letter and some of the others.
that I received after the bibliography was published, and they are so gratifying.
I mean, people were just so, oh my, they're just so kind.
And, of course, the reviews were excellent, especially William Nolan's.
in the Los Angeles Times.
I'll send you a copy of that.
Yes, I'd like to actually see anything that you care to... For me, I like as much material as I can get.
It was reprinted in the European Herald Tribute.
Oh, it was?
And Mary Hemingway saw it when she was in Spain, and she sent it to me.
Of course, my favorite is the one that Tom sent you, the London Times Literary Supplement.
Well, Tom didn't send me that, actually.
He didn't send your answer?
No.
Oh, I thought he sent his letter.
I have a letter here, and he sent me something.
So actually, all I have is his letter.
I don't have anything published, as a matter of fact.
I could send on both of those then.
Okay.
Yeah.
All I have here is he sent me some other material on another subject entirely.
Right.
Soldiers of the Sea, U.S.
Marine Corps, but I have really nothing here.
I'm glad I spoke of it then.
Yeah, I know.
Right.
I certainly will.
I'm very happy to spread the good... What he does is he quotes from part of it here.
Oh, maybe that's it.
Yeah, he just says, he mentions, he said the review dated August 1st, 1968, read in part.
So he quotes from it.
That's right.
Yes.
He quotes two paragraphs from it.
He quotes from that.
But I will...
I will send the Xerox of that and William Nolan.
Let's see, and you were saying about, you said something about... Well, designating these categories, you know, like for collectors and booksellers, they will say that's an A item, a B item, a C item.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
But now simply to...
you know, so that the index, see the index, if you notice, I think, wait a minute, let me look at my own index, is not by page number, it's by item.
Yeah, it'll see E, well, I think, that's right, it says E28F21C
And then 81.
That's why I had, and who I got that from, I couldn't tell you.
But I guess it almost has to be that way.
You can't just send somebody page 344 and have them hunting out on the whole page to see the one item that they...
that they want to now you never imagined that it would be this this this uh huge uh an undertaking no no not at all um and i hope i'm i hope i've given you a clear picture of how it did involve uh evolve excuse me how it evolved uh because uh as you can see i never uh i never thought that i would end up doing uh
Well, let's just say, you know, I didn't expect to ever do it.
I'm still a little amazed.
Charlie Mann said that I was the first woman to do a bibliography of a major literary figure.
Now, I haven't checked that out.
The first woman?
Uh-huh.
To do a bibliography of a... That's what Charlie told me.
Now, who's Charlie Mann?
Charlie Mann, he was the librarian of special collections at Penn... Oh, you mentioned that, yes.
Uh-huh.
He was a good friend of the Goldwaters.
I worked there, I believe I told you, for Eleanor Goldwater at the Corner Bookstore on Ross Avenue.
She specialized in cookbooks.
And then her husband, Walter Goldwater, had a bookstore on University Place.
And they were very good friends of Charlie's.
And so that I met him after the, I believe, after the bibliography.
He was very, very helpful with the supplement.
Sent me information.
I have to think, though, have you read everything that Hemingway wrote?
Oh, let's say...
I mean, certainly not literally, but let's say virtually, you know?
And if there is, I'm not sure what it would, no, I wouldn't have read all these.
Well, I would have read them in byline, whatever the Toronto dispatches were.
Can't think offhand.
But do you think you know him very well now from having gone through all this stuff?
Do you think you know him as an individual at all?
Or is he still kind of this distant writer?
Considering that this was all 30 years ago, but you might notice in the first paragraph of my preface, and I called Hemingway the greatest writer of the 20th century.
Well, I had planned to write the most influential writer of the 20th century.
And to use a lovely quote by, oh, it's Lewis, somebody, and I cannot think of his last name.
Anyway, perhaps you've even heard it, that half the young writers tried to imitate him and the other half tried not to.
That's right.
I've heard that quote, yeah.
But I can't think of Lewis.
Well, anyway, but at the time I was working on the preface, in the preface of a biography of Faulkner,
And the biographer claimed Faulkner was, quote, the greatest writer of the 20th century.
And I read that, and I decided that all he was giving was his opinion, and I could give mine.
Well, do you believe that he's the greatest writer of the 20th century still?
If not the greatest, certainly one of the top greatest.
I would not put Faulkner ahead of him.
I would not put Fitzgerald ahead of him.
I'm not that familiar with a lot of the European writers.
Who would you put ahead of him?
Well, I don't know.
Myself, I'm a big Faulkner fan myself, but that's a... Are you a Faulkner fan?
But I have a lot of Hemingway First Editions.
Did you ever collect?
Did you ever become a collector during all of this?
No, I truly didn't.
I was lucky to be given some old little ephemera, different things, say, that Matt Bruckley and Frasier Clark...
had printed little limited copies, but no.
No, I never had the wherewithal to enter into that at all.
I don't recall that I ever bought a thing from Morgan.
He used to love that.
But do you also point out that this in no way was ever intended to be a descriptive bibliography or a textual bibliography, I guess?
See, that came in with the
about the collation, where you said, ask me if I, yes.
It just, there was just so much that I didn't go beyond what I felt was necessary to the
Hemingway scholar, student, well, maybe not scholar, but say student, book dealer, aficionado, and so that I did not do that.
But...
Let's see.
Does it please you when you see, for instance, you'll see at a book, I don't know if you ever get to see any of these booksellers' catalogs, but they will say Hahnemann X number.
You know, they'll cite you, and it happens all the time.
Or such and such a book, and it'll be, they'll say Hahnemann page or whatever, D. That happens all the time, you know, of course.
And I love it.
I'll be frank.
I really do.
But what I like even more is when, in acknowledgments, in books about Hemingway, the way, and of course the way Carlos Baker did it, and the way, well, with the Hemingway manuscript, that's the, I treasure my inscribed copy of that.
You know, Charles Mann and Philip Young worked there in the, in the,
Mary lived in a penthouse there at the big blue building at 65th and Madison, and she kept the papers in the safe deposit boxes in the bank on the first floor.
And that's where Charlie and Philip Young worked on the Hemingway manuscripts, and I was able to identify some of the fragments.
But to...
The way they acknowledged my health and all, oh, that's ever so gratifying.
Now, who published, which book is this?
Oh, that's the Hemingway Manuscripts that Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania published.
U-Pen or Penn State?
Right.
University of Pennsylvania?
Penn State, Penn State University.
Okay.
Pennsylvania State University.
press, right?
Uh-huh.
How long ago did they do that, I wonder?
I'd have to go over and look at that.
Well, that's okay, but it's some time ago?
But they actually published the manuscripts?
No, they just published the list of what went to the Kennedy Library, the manuscripts.
Oh, I see.
listed the manuscripts.
But see, she had all these little scraps and all these little fragments and parts, and then of course she had that ghastly Garden of Eden that they published.
And I was able to tell, I did not get to the fall, but Charlie Xerox, some
and then I was able to tell them what issue, what Hemingway article in Esquire that the fragment came from or what, you know, what other periodical that was, I just, you know.
Have you ever been to the Kennedy Library here in Boston?
Yes.
Joe August.
She sent me an invitation, and Marge and I went up for a session and for the conference the evening that they had the dedication of the Hemingway Room, very July, 1980.
And I was so sorry, Mary Hemingway was ill, and she was unable to attend.
But I met a number of professors who had written works on Hemingway.
I met Michael Reynolds.
Princeton University Press had asked me to do the reader's report on his Hemingway reading, and he was just ever so nice.
Well, they all were.
They were just so complimentary.
They said it was more interesting talking to me than any of the accomplished fashion admin, which, of course, pleased me, and it was meant to.
So this becomes a legacy of viewers, doesn't it, this book, this project?
It does.
it certainly in in a sense uh-huh it's something that has given me no it gives me enormous satisfaction to have have done it i've i've written a lot all my life but it's the only public my only published work besides what i
what I did for the Fitzgerald Hemingway annual.
And this gives me a lot of satisfaction.
You know, you mentioned foreign translations.
Let me tell you my most delightful experience.
I was at the New York Public Library there, you know, along the wall in the reading room, and I was having trouble figuring out an entry in a Greek reference book.
So I asked an elderly man who was working in the area, and he looked at it and he said,
the sun comes up, too.
And I thanked him, and he said, that means something.
He looked so bewildered.
Oh, goodness.
Oh, that's funny.
You can see, I just was interested in absolutely every phase.
Where did you take your notes in?
I mean, in journals and notebooks?
when you were working in the field like that, because you really didn't have Xerox machines available to you, did you?
Well, I did in a lot of cases, yes, in the libraries.
Now, I didn't like, you know, when I was working under such pressure with collectors' copies and all, but I did do a lot of Xeroxing, and I did a great, great many notes,
And, uh, but just, uh, just in notebooks, like in, uh, shorthand, uh, I don't take shorthand, but, I mean, I do not write in shorthand, but, um, in shorthand, uh, uh,
What am I trying?
Notebooks.
Yeah.
Yeah, because they're not signed.
How many notebooks do you think you filled?
Oh, I couldn't tell you.
I truly couldn't tell you.
Hundreds?
I've simply discarded all of that so long ago.
You didn't throw that stuff away, did you?
Oh, absolutely.
You did?
How could you check on something to make sure it was right, though?
It never occurred to me that that, I mean, as long as it was in, it's in the book, it's there.
Now, it's true that the letters that I gave to, the very large box of letters that I gave to, well, it wasn't, it was like, you know, where you get a... Where is that?
Say a ream of paper, that size box, to Maryland.
Now, I noted that, you know, there were some letters where they mentioned Hemingway items that I had been unable to find, and there were even, although I think I've kept all where there's been, where anybody has noted an omission, but...
Let's see, I was going to tell you something more about Mary.
Oh, yes, yes.
She was, although she claimed early on that she couldn't help me, she invited, I was up there a number of times, and she invited Marge and me for tea and to a large party honoring Frank Church, and she was really ever so nice.
But I was so tickled when Andreas Brown, owner of Gotham Bookmark, I don't know if he still is, but he told me that when Mary was going to Australia and she was planning on stopping in the Crimea in order to get Hemingway's royalties, you know, they won't, you know, you have to go there to get anything.
At least she did at that time.
And she phoned him and asked where, she phoned Andreas,
and asked where she could find evidence of what had been published in Russia.
And he told her, it's all there in Hanneman's Hemingway.
And he said, after a dead silence, she says, it's right here on my desk.
That's a great story.
And she's the one that didn't want you to make any money on it, right?
Well, no, no.
She was afraid.
She was afraid I was in.
No, no, no.
I didn't mean to see.
I obviously misspoke.
Well, she was concerned.
was that I was going to be in for a big shock, that this wasn't going to earn me a whole lot of money, you know, because— Oh, I see.
I'm sorry.
I misunderstood.
Yes.
See, I'm glad that came up.
You know, like, because there were—around that time, she was suing Hotchner for— or trying to hold up his book or something, and there was all so much money that he—
that he made from, what was it, Papa Hemingway?
She was tough.
I mean, Mary was tough.
Yes, she was.
Excuse me.
And she was concerned.
She was concerned that she... See, and then Charles Scribner had...
They had only printed Lee Samuels the Hemingway checklist in 750 copies.
And he thought that that was about the limit of a Hemingway bibliography might sell.
See, because if only that many people were buying that.
And so he apparently had said something to her, and she in turn was warning me
And, of course, I hadn't really, I mean, never gave that aspect of it that much thought.
They didn't understand I was doing something I loved doing.
I was fascinated by every time a footnote that I hadn't checked, you know, and then I could check it out.
And every time I found something, when I found something new that hadn't been listed,
by anyone before.
So that, anyway.
So did you ever, were there ever any great surprises or was it just kind of long, steady, hard work?